add tutorial on contact matrices (#52)
epiverse-trace/tutorials-late: episodes/contact-matrices.Rmd

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<!-- ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: prereq -->

<!-- ## Prerequisites -->

<!-- ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: -->

## Introduction

Heterogeneity of contact patterns between different groups affects disease transmission. The rate of contact within and between groups can be presented in a contact matrix. In this tutorial we are going to learn how contact matrices can be used in different analyses and how the `{socialmixr}` package can be used to estimate contact matrices. 

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
library(socialmixr)
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## The contact matrix

A contact matrix represents the amount of contact or mixing within and between subgroups. The subgroups are often age categories but can also be geographic areas or high/low risk groups. For example, a contact matrix representing the number of contacts per day in children and adults could be:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
8 & 2\\
2 & 7 
\end{bmatrix}
$$

> Children contact 8 other children each day, adults contact 7 other adults and children contact 2 adults (and vice versa). We can use this kind of information to account for the role heterogeneity in contact plays in infectious disease transmission. 

Reviewer: This might seem an overly complex point at this stage but I think it would be helpful to clarify here if these are averages or total numbers (could also use this to subtly introduce asymmetry). E.g. we could say

```suggestion
A contact matrix represents the amount of contact or mixing within and between subgroups. The subgroups are often age categories but can also be geographic areas or high/low risk groups. For example, a contact matrix representing the average number of contacts per day between children and adults could be:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
2 & 2\\
1 & 3 
\end{bmatrix}
$$
In this example, we would use this to represent that children meet, on average, 2 other children and 2 adult per day (first row), and adults meet, on average, 1 child and 3 other adults per day (second row). We can use this kind of information to account for the role heterogeneity in contact plays in infectious disease transmission.

## Estimating contact matrices

> Contact matrices can be estimated from surveys or contact data, or synthetic ones can be used. The POLYMOD survey measured contact patterns in 8 European countries using data on the location and duration of contacts reported by the study participants [(Mossong et al. 2008)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074). [Prem et al. 2021](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098) used the POLYMOD data within a Bayesian hierarchical model to project contact matrices for 177 other countries. 

Reviewer: I would maybe leave the different methods for generating contact matrices for later and then describe in more detail (and probably at some stage introduce the contactmatrix package, once we have a common contact matrix class, which is work in progress).

```suggestion
Contact matrices can be estimated from diary data. For example, the POLYMOD survey measured contact patterns in 8 European countries using data on the location and duration of contacts reported by the study participants [(Mossong et al. 2008)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074).
```

> The R package `{socialmixr}` contains functions which can estimate contact matrices from the POLYMOD and other surveys. We can load the POLYMOD survey data :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The R package `{socialmixr}` contains functions which can estimate contact matrices from POLYMOD and other surveys. We can load the POLYMOD survey data :
```

I think it's commonly referred to without "the" although I don't know why.

```{r polymod_, echo = TRUE}
polymod <- socialmixr::polymod
```

Then we can obtain the contact matrix for the age categories we want by specifying `age.limits`. 

```{r polymod_uk, echo = TRUE}
contact_data <- contact_matrix(
  survey = polymod,
  countries = "United Kingdom",
  age.limits = c(0, 20, 40),
  symmetric = TRUE
)
contact_data
```

> **Note: although the contact matrix is not mathematically symmetric, it satisfies the condition that the total number of contacts of one group with another is the same as the reverse. For the mathematical explanation see [here](https://epiforecasts.io/socialmixr/articles/socialmixr.html#symmetric-contact-matrices).**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note: although the contact matrix is not mathematically symmetric, it satisfies the condition that the total number of contacts of one group with another is the same as the reverse. For the mathematical explanation see [the corresponding section in the socialmixr documentation](https://epiforecasts.io/socialmixr/articles/socialmixr.html#symmetric-contact-matrices).**
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout
### Why would a contact matrix be non-symmetric?

> One of the arguments of the function `contact_matrix()` is `symmetric=TRUE`. This means that the total number of contacts of age group 1 with age group 2, should be the same as the total number of contacts of age group 2 and age group 1 (see the `socialmixr` [vignette](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/socialmixr/vignettes/socialmixr.html) for more detail). However, when contact matrices are estimated from surveys or other sources, the *reported* number of contacts may differ by age group resulting in a non-symmetric contact matrix [(Prem et al 2021)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the arguments we gave the function `contact_matrix()` is `symmetric=TRUE`. This means that the total number of contacts of age group 1 with age group 2, should be the same as the total number of contacts of age group 2 and age group 1 (see the `socialmixr` [vignette](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/socialmixr/vignettes/socialmixr.html) for more detail). However, when contact matrices are estimated from surveys or other sources, the *reported* number of contacts may differ by age group resulting in a non-symmetric contact matrix because of uncertainty from using a limited sample of participants [(Prem et al 2021)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098). If `symmetric` is set to TRUE, the `contact_matrix()` function will internally use an average of reported contacts to ensure resulting total number of contacts are symmetric.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

The example above uses the POLYMOD survey. There are a number of surveys available in `socialmixr`, to list the available surveys use `list_surveys()`. To download a survey, we can use `get_survey()`

```{r, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
zambia_sa_survey <- get_survey("https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3874675")
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Zambia contact matrix

> After downloading the survey, load contact and population data for Zambia using the following age bins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After downloading the survey, generate a symmetric contact matrix for Zambia using the following age bins:
```

+ [0,15)

> + 20 +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ 20+
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

```{r polymod_poland}
contact_data_zambia <- contact_matrix(
  survey = zambia_sa_survey,
  age.limits = c(0, 20),
  symmetric = TRUE
)
contact_data_zambia
```
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Analyses with contact matrices

Contact matrices can be used in a wide range of epidemiological analyses, they can be used:

+ to calculate the basic reproduction number while accounting for different rates of contacts between age groups [(Funk et al. 2019)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1413-7),
+ to calculate final size of an epidemic, see the R package `{finalsize}`,
+ to assess the impact of interventions finding the relative change between pre and post intervention contact matrices to calculate the relative difference in $R_0$ [(Jarvis et al. 2020)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01597-8),
+ and in mathematical models to account for group specific contact patterns (see next section.)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout
## Normalisation

> There are times when we need to change the scale of our contact matrices e.g. to compare matrices to model projected matrices [(Prem et al. 2021)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098) the entries need to be on the same scale.

Reviewer: I think this is usually motivated by wanting to use a contact matrix as next generation matrix (NGM) with a given R0 (which is given by the dominant eigenvalue). Normalising the contact matrix means I can just use R0 * matrix to get the NGM.

Not quite sure how best to phrase this here without being overly complicated but perhaps it could be related to the equations below (which if C is normalised give a "traditonal" R0 of beta/gamma).

Normalisation means converting a value to be between 0 and 1.To normalise a matrix we scale the matrix so that the largest eigenvalue is 1. This transformation scales the entries between 0 and 1 but preserves the relative differences between the entries. To perform this normalisation we divide all entries of the matrix by the largest eigenvalue of the matrix.

```{r}
contact_matrix <- t(contact_data$matrix)
contact_matrix <- contact_matrix / max(eigen(contact_matrix)$values)

> contact_matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
normalised_matrix <- contact_matrix*scaling_factor

r0 <- 2
beta <- r0*scaling_factor*gamma
```
Not sure this is optimal in terms of R syntax vs equations, but hopefully on the right track in communication terms!

       width = 1.3]

       S
       I
       R

  # edges
  #######
  S -> I [label = ' infection \n(transmission rate &beta;)']
  I -> R [label = ' recovery \n(recovery rate &gamma;)']

}")
```

The [differential equations](../learners/reference.md#ordinary) below describe how individuals move from one state to another [(Bjørnstad et al. 2020)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-0822-z).

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{dS}{dt} & = - \beta S I \\
\frac{dI}{dt} &= \beta S I - \gamma I \\
\frac{dR}{dt} &=\gamma I \\
\end{aligned}
$$
To add age structure to our model, we need to add additional equations for the infection states $S$, $I$ and $R$ for each age group $i$. If we want to assume that there is heterogeneity in contacts between age groups then we must adapt the transmission term $\beta SI$ to include the contact matrix $C$ as follows :

$$ \beta S_i \sum_j C_{i,j} I_j. $$ 
Susceptible individuals in age group $i$ become infected dependent on their rate of contact with individuals in each age group. For each disease state ($S$, $E$, $I$ and $R$) and age group ($i$), we have a differential equation describing the rate of change with respect to time.  

$$
\begin{aligned}

> \frac{dS_i}{dt} & = - \beta S_i \sum_j C_{i,j} I_j \\

Author: Yes, now that we have defined the pre-transpose contact matrix as Cij this should be Cji - thanks!
